Slide 1:
Good afternoon! My name is Kulikov Vladimir and I’m going to talk about H2A.J histone and its differences in various organisms.
Slide 2:
H2A.J histone is a human histone, which sequence is very similar to canonical H2A histones.
On the slide you can see multiple alignment of histone H2A.J and various canonical histones.
There are 2 main differences between H2A.J sequence and every other sequence. Firstly, the substitution of alanine to valine in 10th position. Secondly, some differences in the C-tail.
Slide 3:
Our goal was to investigate H2A.J histone sequences in other organisms, reveal their differences in the sequence and taxonomic distribution.
Tasks of our work are presented on the slide.
Slide 4:
First of all, we did a BLAST with sequence of human H2A.J.
In our research we wanted to investigate H2A.J histones in other organisms. So, we took only sequences with “J” in the title.
Slide 5:
Secondly, we did an alignment of founded sequences. As you can see, sequences have a clear difference in the 132th position. Some of them have a SQK motif, while other have an SHK motif, like canonical histones.
We wanted to investigate if these sequences could be classified as H2A.J or not. So, we divide our list of sequences in two groups (SQK and SHK)
Slide 6:
We make a graph of taxonomic distribution of our sequences. All SQK sequences belong to mammalian group, while SHK sequences belong to multiple groups.
Slide 7:
We construct a phylogenetic tree of our sequences. As you can see, all SQK sequences grouped in one clade and belong to mammalian. These sequences also belong to a larger clade. Apparently, SQK motif, the crucial motif for H2A.J histone, evolved from basal SHK variant. This happened one time in Mammalian group.
In addition, in the tree we can see some sequences belong to mammalian with “SHK” motif. We checked several of them and found that they are encoded by canonical H2A gene.
Slide 8:
As a final step, we performed separate alignments for these 2 groups of sequences.
Alignment of sequences with SHK showed that many of them have a valine in the 10th position. This indicates that the transition from SHK to SQK did not immediately lead to other characteristic substitutions.
Slide 9:
Alignment of sequences with SQK motif (true H2A.J histones) showed that these histones have some differences among mammals. The highest variability was at position 126, just after the SQK motif.
A specific pattern in the Muridae family - K100R substitution. Other mutations seem to be randomly distributed.
Slide 10:
The results are summarized on the slide.
Thank you for your attention! I would like to answer your questions.